[music]
Hello everyone. Having a good conference
so far?
>> Are you having a good conference so far?
>> Good. Wonderful.
I have a message for you that I hope
will be um a comforting message for
folks who believe that uh their skill
set is no longer worth anything in this
new age, which is I believe that
software fundamentals matter now more
than they actually ever have.
And
I'm a teacher and I've been recently
teaching a course called Claude Code for
real engineers. Nice and provocative.
And in the process of kind of working on
this course, I had to come up with a
curriculum about AI coding, which is a
bit of a nightmare because things are
changing all the time, right? AI is a
whole new paradigm. We need to chuck out
all of the old rules surely so that we
can bring in the new stuff.
And there's a kind of movement that has
come up around this, which is the specs
to code movement. And the specs to code
movement says that okay you can write a
specification about how an application
is supposed to work then you can use AI
to turn it into code. If there's a
problem with the application you then go
back to the spec. You don't really look
at the code. You just change the spec.
You run the compiler again and you end
up with more code. Raise your hand if
you've heard of that. Keep your hand
raised if you've tried it. Okay. I've
tried it too. You can put your hands
down.
And what I noticed was I would run it
and I would try not to look at the code
but I would look at the code and I
realized I would get code out first of
all and then I would run it I would get
worse code and then I did it again I got
even worse code and I got it again I
kept running the compiler kept running
the compiler and I would just end up
with garbage.
You know raise your hand if that's
happened to you. Yes. I don't think this
works. the idea that we can just ignore
the code and just have the code let it
manage itself is just sort of v coding
by another name
and I didn't believe that back then I
thought okay how do I fix the compiler
how do I make it so that it doesn't
produce bad code each time or worse code
and so I thought okay I need to explain
to the LLM in English what a good
codebase looks like let me dig out one
of my old favorite books which is a
philosophy of software design by John
ouster go on Amazon get it. Um, and he
has a definition for what bad code looks
like. He calls it complex code.
Complexity is anything related to the
structure of a software system that
makes it hard to understand and modify
the system. Right? So, a a bad codebase
is a codebase that's hard to change. If
you can't change a codebase without
causing bugs, then it's a bad codebase.
Good code bases are easy to change. So,
I thought, oh, that was good. Let's try
another book. Let's try the paragmatic
programmer. Go on Amazon, get it. They
have a whole chapter on something called
software entropy. And this is exactly
what I was seeing. Entropy is the idea
that things tend towards um disaster and
uh floating away from each other and
collapse. And this is exactly how most
software systems behave too is that
every time you make a change to a
codebase, if you're only thinking about
that change, not thinking about the
design of the whole system, your
codebase is going to get worse and worse
and worse. And that's what I was seeing.
Everything inside the specs to code idea
that you just run the compiler again and
again was making worse code. Now there's
an idea that sort of drives the specs to
code movement which is that code is
cheap. Raise your hand if you've heard
that phrase before that code is cheap.
Yeah.
Well, I don't think this is right. I
think code is not cheap. In fact, bad
code is the most expensive it's ever
been. Because if you have a codebase
that's hard to change, you're not able
to take all of the bounty that AI can
offer because AI in a good codebase
actually does really, really well.
And this means good code bases matter
more than ever, which means software
fundamentals matter more than ever.
That's the thesis of this talk. So,
let's actually get into practical stuff.
I'm going to talk about different
failure modes that you may have
experienced or you may not have
experienced yet with AI and how you can
avoid them by just going back to old
books and looking at good software
practices. Sound good? So, the first one
is that the AI didn't do what I wanted.
You know, I I thought I had a good idea
in my head and the AI just did something
totally different or it did some uh like
specs that I you know, it just made
something I didn't want. Raise your hand
if you've hit this mode.
Cool. Okay. Well, this is what they say
in the pragmatic programmer is that no
one knows exactly what they want. Is
that you and the AI, there is a
communication barrier there, right? And
so when you're talking to the AI, that's
kind of like the AI doing its
requirements gathering. It's basically
working out from you what it is that you
need. And I realized that there was
another book, Frederick P. Brooks, the
design of design, and it talks about
this idea called the design concept. is
that when you have more than one person
designing something together, you have
this idea sort of floating between you,
this ephemeral idea of the thing that
you're building. And that thing that
you're building or the idea of it is
called the design concept. It's not an
asset. It's not something you can put in
a markdown file. It is the invisible
sort of theory of what you're building.
And so I thought, okay, that's what's
going on. Me and the AI don't share a
design concept. So I came up with a
skill. The skill is very very simple.
It's called grill me and it looks like
this. Interview me relentlessly about
every aspect of this plan until we reach
a shared understanding. Walk down each
branch of the design tree which is
another thing from Frederick P. Brooks
resolving dependencies between decisions
one by one. This skill is like uh the
repo containing this skill has like
13,000 stars or something like it just
went nuts. Went viral. People love this
thing. it. These couple of lines means
the AI asks you like 40 questions, 60
questions. I've had it ask uh people a
hundred questions before it's satisfied
they've reached a shared understanding.
And it means it turns the AI into a kind
of adversary where it's just continually
pinging you ideas and trying to reach a
shared understanding. And that means
that the conversation that you then
generate, you can take that and turn it
into a product requirements document or
something. or if it's a small change,
you can just uh do turn it directly into
issues and then your AFK agent will then
pick it up. And don't at me on this, but
I personally believe this is better than
the default plan mode in the tool that I
use, which is claw code. Plan mode is
extremely eager to create an asset. It
really wants to uh just create a plan
and start working. whereas I think it's
a lot nicer to reach a shared design
concept first. So that's tip number one.
Now failure mode number two is that the
AI is just way too verbose.
It's like you're almost talking across
purposes with the AI. Raise your hand if
you uh feel this. If you ever experience
that failure mode. Yeah. It's kind of
like the AI is like talking just using
too many words to try to communicate
what it's doing. It's not like you're
talking uh using the same language. And
this to me felt very very familiar.
Right? If you've ever been a developer
for a long time and you've worked with
let's say domain experts, someone
building an application um let's say the
domain expert wants you to build
something on uh I don't know microchips.
You have no idea what microchips are.
You need to establish some kind of
shared language, right? Because
otherwise they're going to be using
terms you don't understand. You're going
to be translating that into code that
maybe you don't even understand and
certainly the domain expert won't. And
so there's this kind of language gap
between you and the domain expert. And
so I went back to domain driven design.
DDD, this is something I'm still kind of
on the edge of exploring, but everything
I'm reading about DDD is just music to
my ears. I freaking love it. And DDD has
a concept of a ubiquitous language.
With ubiquitous language, conversations
among developers and expressions of the
code and conversations with domain
experts are all derived from the same
domain model. It's essentially a
markdown file full of a list of terms
that you and the AI have in common. And
you really focus on those terms and you
really make sure that they're aligned
with what it actually means and you use
them all the time in the code when
you're talking about the code when
you're talking to domain experts or in
our case when you're talking with AI. So
I made a skill. This skill is the
ubiquitous language skill. Basically
just scans your codebase, looks for
terminology, and then um creates a
markdown file. Creates the ubiquitous
language markdown file. A bunch of
markdown tables with all of the
terminology. And this then I pass it to
the AI and I'm able to read it to and I
actually have it open all the time when
I'm grilling with the AI and planning
and that. And what I noticed by reading
the thinking traces of the AI, it not
only improves the planning, but it
allows the AI to think in a less verbose
way and actually means that the
implementation is more aligned with what
you actually planned. So this has
absolutely been a powerhouse. It's been
unbelievably good. So that's tip number
two. Create a shared language with the
AI. So okay, let's imagine that you've
aligned with the AI. You know what it is
you're supposed to be building. the AI
has built the right thing, but it
doesn't work. Raise your hands if that's
happened to you. Yeah, just doesn't
work. Well, there's an obvious thing
that we can do to make that better,
which is we can use feedback loops. We
can use um static types. You know, if
you're not using TypeScript, u that's
crazy. Uh if you're not using uh if
you're building a front-end app and
you're not giving it the LM access to
the browser so it can look around,
absolutely needs that. And you obviously
also need automated tests.
And one sort of thing I notice here is
that even with these feedback loops, the
LLM doesn't use them very well. It
doesn't kind of like get the most out of
its feedback loops in the way that a
veteran developer would. And so it does
what it tends to do is just does way too
much at once. it will produce like huge
amounts of code and then think, "Oh, I
should probably type check that actually
or I should uh yeah, maybe check a test
on that or maybe do something like
that." And this in the pragmatic
programmer they describe as outrunning
your headlights as essentially driving
too fast because the rate of feedback is
your speed limit. The rate of feedback
is your speed limit, which means that
you should be testing as you go, taking
small deliberate steps. And the AI by
default is really not very good at that.
And so skill number three is TDD. You
should be using testdriven development
because TDD forces the LLM to really
take small steps. You create a test
first. You make that test pass and then
you refactor the code to make it nicer
and consider the design.
The issue here is that testing is really
hard. Testing has always been hard.
And the reason for that
is there are a ton of different
decisions you need to make when you
write a test. You need to figure out how
big a unit do you want to test. You need
to figure out what to mock. You need to
figure out what behaviors do you even
want to test in the first place. And all
of these decisions are dependent. So if
you are testing a really big unit like
an entire massive application, then it
might be quite flaky. You might not want
to test that many behaviors. you know,
if you only test this unit, you need to
mock this unit. You know, it's all
interlin. And I've been thinking about
this for years for my entire development
career.
And what we notice is that good code
bases are easy code bases to test,
right? So, here we're starting to get
back to the idea of code being important
is that the better your codebase is, the
better your feedback loops are. Because
you're able to um give better feedback
to the LM, it produces better code.
And so I thought what does a good
codebase what does a testable codebase
look like? Again we go to John
[clears throat] erhout. He talks about
having deep modules in your codebase.
Not shallow modules not lots of modules
that expose like kind of um lots of
functions. They should be relatively few
large deep modules with simple
interfaces. Let's compare them quickly.
Deep modules, lots of functionality
hidden behind a simple interface, hiding
the complexity. You can look inside the
deep module if you want to, but you
don't need to. You can just use the
interface. Shallow modules, not much
functionality, complex interface.
And I'll just wait for you to take the
photos.
Shallow modules in a codebase kind of
look like this, where you have a ton of
different tiny little blobs that the AI
has to walk through and navigate. And
this is really hard for the AI to
explore actually. And so often what
you'll see is if you have a codebase
like this, which AI is really good at
creating code bases like this is that
you'll have a situation where AI doesn't
understand what your code is doing. It
will attempt to explore the code, but
because it's poorly laid out, filled
with shallow modules, it doesn't maybe
get to the right module in time or
doesn't understand all the dependencies,
all that stuff. It doesn't understand
your code. And so what does a codebase
full of deep modules look like? Well, it
looks like this
where it's the same code, but it's just
structured inside boundaries where you
have these interfaces on the top.
And these interfaces, you should
probably have a lot of control over them
and design them really well. Otherwise,
you know, AI might mess up the design.
But the implementation, you can kind of
leave that to the AI a bit.
So, how do you turn a codebase that
looks like this into a codebase that
looks like that? Well, I've got a skill
for that. Improve codebase architecture.
Turns out this is not it's quite
complicated to do this, but it's a like
a set of steps that you can reusably do
again and again. You just sort of
explore the codebase, look for
opportunities where there's code that's
kind of um related, and wrap all of that
in a deep module.
And this is a testable codebase because
the boundaries around this code are so
so simple. You test at the interface,
you verify using that interface and
you're good to go. And so this is a
codebase that rewards TDD.
But how about failure bone number six,
which is your okay, let's say your
feedback loops are working. Let's say
that things are kicking into gear.
You're able to ship more code than you
ever have before, but your brain can't
keep up, right? Uh, raise your hand if
you felt more tired than you have ever
before in your development career. Yeah,
me too. It's knackering. And I think
that this is a codebase that actually
makes it harder for your brain because
you as well as the AI need to keep all
of that information in your head.
Whereas this, not only is it simpler
for you to read and understand, it also
means you can kind of treat these
modules or these deep modules as gray
boxes.
you can kind of say okay I'm going to
just design the interface but I'm not
going to worry too much or not review
the implementation too much you can do
this obviously with uh things that are
less critical in your application can't
do this with uh you know various things
like finance or whatever but in many
many modules in your app you don't need
to think about the implementation too
much as long as you have a testable
boundary outside the module and as long
as you understand its purpose and can
design it from the outside I have found
this has really saved my brain because I
can just go okay the AI I'll let you
handle what's inside the big blob I'm
just going to test from the outside and
verify it so that's tip number five
design the interface delegate the
implementation
but this means that whenever we're
touching the code whenever we're
planning stuff we need to think about
and be aware of the modules in our
application we need to know that map
really well it needs to be part of our
ubiquitous language we need to build
into our planning skills as well. So my
writer PRD inside the PRD I'm specific
about the module changes and the
interfaces inside those modules how
they're being modified. I'm thinking
about them all the time. And this comes
from Kent Beck. Invest in the design of
the system every day. And this is the
core of it right because specs the code
we are not investing in the design of
the system we are divesting from it.
We're getting rid of that. Whereas this
I think is absolutely key.
And so code is not cheap. That's the
message I want you to take away. Code is
important.
And if we think about AI as a really
great on the ground programmer, a kind
of tactical programmer, a sergeant on
the ground making the code changes, you
need someone above that. You need
someone thinking on the strategic level
and that's you. And that requires
software fundamental skills that we've
been using for 20 years for longer.
Now, if you are interested in any of the
skills I put up here, it's in the GitHub
repo, Mac PCO skills. And if you're
interested in the training that I do or
uh any free stuff, I'm on YouTube, I'm
on Twitter, but I'm also at aihero.dev
where I have a newsletter that you can
check out. Thank you so much. I hope
that this gives you confidence in this
new AI age that you can actually make a
good impact. Thank you.
>> [music]
[applause]
[music]